# Political Change in Eastern Europe 1989-2001

2020-04-27 15:44 :17
#review

- [Political Change in Eastern Europe 1989-2001](#political-change-in-eastern-europe-1989-2001)
  - [List of Changes that Ocurred in Eastern Europe](#list-of-changes-that-ocurred-in-eastern-europe)
  - [PYQs](#pyqs)

---

- [ ] #todo

## List of Changes that Ocurred in Eastern Europe

- The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the subsequent reunification of Germany.
- The Velvet Revolution in Czechoslovakia in 1989, leading to the dissolution of the country in 1993.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Romania in 1989.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Bulgaria in 1989.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Hungary in 1989.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Poland in 1989.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in East Germany in 1989.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Albania in 1991.
- The dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Lithuania in 1991, Latvia in 1991, Estonia in 1991.
- The dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Belarus in 1994.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Ukraine in 1994.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Moldova in 1994.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Yugoslavia in 2000.
- The overthrow of the Communist regime in Macedonia in 2001.
- The accession of the Czech Republic and Slovakia to the European Union in 2004.
- The accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the European Union in 2007.

## PYQs

1. In what way did the political changes in Soviet Union influence the events in Eastern Europe during the closing decades of 20th Century? [2016, 20 Marks]

