# Conflict b/w English and the Nawabs of Bengal

2020-04-27 14:56:10

- [Conflict b/w English and the Nawabs of Bengal](#conflict-bw-english-and-the-nawabs-of-bengal)
  - [Conflict b/w Siraj and the English](#conflict-bw-siraj-and-the-english)
    - [Black Hole Tragedy](#black-hole-tragedy)

---

- **1717** Farman Farrukhsiar gave duty free trade Murhsid Quli Khan was against, refused minting privileges, dastak misuse
- French onslaught - B fortify Calcutta
- Alivardi khan Usurped power by killing Sarfaraz khan. He likened the Europeans and despite repeated appeals did not oust them after the Europeans toppled rulers in the south.

## Conflict b/w Siraj and the English

2020-04-27 14:58:00

---

- English had begun to strengthen their fortifications anticipating further Anglo-French struggle.
- Meanwhile Siraj was facing claims to his throne by Ghaisiti Begum and Shaukaj Jung.
- English indirectly supported Ghasiti Begum they also gave asylum to political opponents of Siraj -> led to Siraj attacking fort Williame in 1756
- Siraj stopped misuse of datak was against EIC giving asylum to Krishna Ballabh, captured Kasimbazar

**Phillip Woodruff** : plunder was the main motive behind Nawabs attack

### Black Hole Tragedy

- On 20th June 1756, English prisoners including Women and Children were put in a prison room to a total of 146.
- 123 died due to suffocation, trampling and excessive heat.
- It was used as a propaganda device to malign Siraj's position as the nawab
- Nawab was not directly responsible but he did not punish the subordinate responsible for the massacre
- Holwell one of the survivors account was widely used by the English newspapers to show nawab's cruelty and callousness. His description was later found to be unreliable.

**Brijen Gupta** : number of those that entered the hole was 64 and survivors were 21.
