# Economic Transformation of India

2020-04-27 15:04:45

- [Economic Transformation of India](#economic-transformation-of-india)
  - [Role of Indian Investors/Industiralists](#role-of-indian-investorsindustiralists)
  - [Inter War Period Factors that Affected Industrial Enterprise](#inter-war-period-factors-that-affected-industrial-enterprise)
  - [Organisations Formed](#organisations-formed)
  - [PYQ](#pyq)


---

- Economic favouritism - Ex Tea plantation in Assam
- Native investors ignored
- Inland Emigration #Act 1859 made sure a steady supply of labour
- Coal mining Br capital dominated

## Role of Indian Investors/Industiralists

- TISCO started produced 66% locally consumed steel
- Ltd growth potential, no gov intervention
- IN investors operated in sectors where risks to high or return too low

**Rajat Ray** : called it  imperial division of economic space

**Anand Yang** : these sectors provided profitable ground for indegenous bankers


## Inter War Period Factors that Affected Industrial Enterprise

- Tendency towards import substitution in consumer goods
- Attention towards domestic market
- Growth in internal trade
- Shift of traditionally accumulated capital through trade
- Moneylending
- Outflow of foreign capital
- @ Rupee collapsed Dec 1920 -> hurt importers, helped exporters, wartime tax, currency fluctuation, wartime boom collapsed in 1921-22 - slump in industry, unsold stocks, rising labour cost.
- Cotton protection act 1930 raise cotton duties to non-B goods.
- Artificially fixed rupee sterling -> Hilton Young Comm 1926

- **Sumit Sarkar** : 1930 depression created a groundswell opinion to participate in CDM
-  **Aditya Mukherjee** :  by 1944 the control of Indian capital in smaller industries was absolute 


- Indian controlled areas were Sugar, paper, cement, iron, steel, Also in finance, insurance, jute, mining, plantation.
- They Consolidated their position in traditional areas like Cotton.

## Organisations Formed

1. Bengal National Chamber of commerce 1887
2. Merchants Chamber Bombay 1907
3. 1921 ASSOCHAM
4. FICCI 1927


-   **Bipan Chandra** : Indian capitalist class had long term contradiction w/ imperialism, while retaining relationship of short term dependence on and accommodating w/ it
-   **Maria Misra** : attitude of B capitalist was insistent on their racial exclusivism and autonomy that hardened towards their IN counterpart
-   **Markovits** : participation of Businessmen was more complicated


## PYQ

1. Trace the industrial growth of British India after the First World War. How did the Government's tariff policy influence the growth? [1983, 60m]

2. Identify the main features of industrial development in India from 1914 to 1947 with special reference to the emergence of a class of factory laborers. [1989, 60m]

3. Identify the distinct stages of colonialism in India. How did these stages affect the Indian economy? [1991, 60m]
- Refer Rajiv Ahir


1. How do you account for the rise and growth of the Business enterprise in India during the first half of the 20th century? [1994, 60m]


2. Economic changes in India from the late 1920s influenced the course of the country's politics. Elucidate. [1995, 60m]
